"to lead a rich,
fulfilling, happy life."
But you cant always
get what you want.
WOMAN: Is happiness an
experience that comes and goes
or is it a state
that you can live in
for long periods of time?
I dont... I dont know.
(screaming)
"GILBERT: This emotional
life is a roller coaster,"
taking us from the
heights of ecstasy
to the depths of despair
and every place between.
WOMAN: All emotions have a role
in a healthy life.
Were not automatons.
"GILBERT: Im Dan Gilbert,"
"and in this series,
Im going to introduce
you to everyday people"
"who are searching
for happiness,"
as well as to the scientists
and clinicians who are
trying to help them find it.
WOMAN: What Ive taken away
is the resilience
of the human spirit.
It is just amazing what we
can go through and be okay.
(explosion)
MAN: I thought I
was going crazy--
"the dreams, the nightmares."
But Im not letting it beat me.
What more can I say?
Im a happy camper. (laughs)
GILBERT: Well see how our
greatest source of happiness
lies in the people around us.
"MAN: A basic need for
human beings is love,"
is companionship.
GILBERT: Well explore the
obstacles to happiness--
"emotions such as fear,
sadness and anger."
Have I lost it to the point
where I did feel
like Ive lost it?
Yeah.
I went through like
six or seven years
of real depression.
I just was never quite
given the right pill.
"GILBERT: But next, well
see what happiness is..."
(laughs)
what causes it and why we look
for it in all the wrong places.
MAN: I won the lottery
but being happy/content
takes work.
WOMAN: I used to think that
things would make me happy.
"Or money, success."
Im realizing now that
thats not the fact.
Happiness comes from within.
And happiness comes from
experiences that we have
with people that we love.
"GILBERT: Coming up,
""Rethinking Happiness,"""
on This Emotional Life.
Captioning sponsored
by THE CORPORATION FOR
PUBLIC BROADCASTING
and VIEWERS LIKE YOU
This program was made possible
by the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting
and by contributions to
your PBS station from:
GILBERT: Everybody
wants happiness.
Its a universal human desire.
But it's a desire
not easily satisfied.
"We search without finding
it, and when we do find it,"
it doesn't seem
to last very long.
WOMAN: Why is it
that it is so difficult for
us to hold onto contentment?
"And why are we so fleeting,
and why are we so fickle?"
"Why is it that one day the
things that make us happy,"
the next day bring us misery?
"MAN: Happiness, get over
yourself, what happiness?"
"You know, life is going
to be always challenging."
"It's always going to be
a pain, so get over it."
MAN: I don't think it's
that much of a mystery.
"If you dont have a
job that you like,"
"and youre not having sex,
you're just not gonna be happy."
"I think happiness is
a temporary state,"
but its a juicy one. (laughs)
GILBERT: I'm Dan Gilbert.
Im a social psychologist
and a professor here
at Harvard University.
"For centuries, happiness
has been a subject"
for poets and philosophers.
"But in the last few decades,
psychologists, neuroscientists,"
even economists have
begun to study happiness
using the same scientific
methods they use to study
every other aspect
of human behavior.
"Of course, scientists have
only recently gotten into"
"the happiness business, but
that business has been booming"
for a long time.
You have to train your mind to
recall the simple successes...
"GILBERT: Turn on
the television, surf the
Web, visit a bookstore,"
and youll see that theres
no shortage of people
offering advice about happiness.
"Its going to be fun, yall!"
"All my needs, desires..."
GILBERT: Theyre all part of
a large and growing business
known as the self-help industry.
"This industry may or may
not have made anyone happy,"
but it's definitely made
some people very rich.
WOMAN: It is my pleasure
to welcome you here today
"to the ""You Control
Your Life"" conference."
"GILBERT: Last year, Americans
spent about $10 billion"
on self-help.
Youre in the preferred section.
"GILBERT: Much of that
money was brought in by
conferences like this one,"
"run by Hay House, a leading
self-help publisher."
"WOMAN: For just $20, we
can send you the CDs."
GILBERT: Hay House
sells books and DVDs
on everything from diet
and personal fitness
"to ""Fairy Magic""
and ""Angel Therapy."""
"Wow, theres a lot of
money to be spent here."
"Yes, there is."
How much money are you
going to spend here?
"Well, we didnt even make
it around the tables,"
but it looks like we're
going to be spending a lot.
Stuff looks great.
GILBERT: The desire
for happiness drives
different people
toward different things.
Some have come here
hoping to lose weight;
"some are hoping to
find a new partner,"
"a new career, or a whole
new view of the universe."
"Unbelievingly, amazingly, about
the mind over body connection."
"Getting a better job,
love, relationships..."
All the good things in life.
GILBERT: But some people
have come here with
very serious problems
and they may not be
in the right place.
"Many have been drawn by Louise
Hay, the founder of Hay House."
She claims to have
cured herself of cancer
"through positive thinking and
other self-help techniques,"
"and she tells others
that they can do it, too."
"Although her claims have never
been medically verified,"
shes been a guest on Oprah
"and her memoir,
Heal Your Life, has sold
over 35 million copies,"
making her one of the best-
selling authors of all time.
WOMAN: Please join me in
welcoming Louise Hay.
(applause)
I choose the thoughts
that make me feel good.
"And if you will be very careful
about the thoughts you think,"
that you choose to think...
GILBERT: Hay is
right when she says
that our thoughts
affect our feelings
and that we have some control
over the thoughts we think.
"HAY: Life loves
you, I love you."
Do you love you?
Thats the important thing.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: We love you!
"Thank you, thank
you, I accept."
"I do, you're damn right!"
(laughter)
GILBERT: But Hay also believes
that thoughts are the cause
of all misfortunes...
"Because, remember,
somebody who has depression"
is choosing thoughts that
make them feel rotten.
GILBERT: That by
thinking the wrong way we
can give ourselves cancer
"or AIDS or depression,
cause cars to hit us,"
or make ourselves the target
of a terrorist attack.
"HAY: When I became
80, I decided"
"that it was going to be the
best decade of my entire life,"
and it is. (applause)
Im 82.
"As I go through your book,"
I see all sorts of maladies
and various kinds of thoughts
that you say can cause them.
Alzheimers is an
inability to face life;
"leprosy, an inability
to handle life at all."
"Oh, youre picking
the fun ones."
People who have Alzheimers
are really removing themselves
from life completely.
How do you know?
"How do you know what
you're saying is right?
Oh, my inner ding."
Your ding? My inner ding.
It speaks to me.
"Yes, it feels right or
it doesnt feel right."
Happiness is choosing thoughts
that make you feel good.
Its really very simple.
I hear you saying that
even if there were no proof
"for what you believed,"
"or even if there was
""scientific evidence""
against it..."
"Well, I dont believe in
scientific evidence,"
I really dont.
Science is fairly new.
It hasnt been around that long.
"We think its such a big
deal, but its, you know,"
its just a way of
looking at life.
But youre telling it
to millions of people
"and you're telling them
it's right for them, too."
I'm telling them
what's right for me.
(sighs)
"My inner ding,
that's all I can say."
GILBERT: You know what?
Science is fairly new.
But when we want to know
what causes stars to explode
"or butterflies to migrate,"
we rely on scientific evidence
rather than our inner ding.
So why not do the
same thing to find out
what causes human happiness?
"MAN: For thousands of years,"
philosophers were
asking about happiness
and talking about happiness
but without any data.
And only probably in
the last 30 or 40 years
"have we actually collected
scientific data, rigorous data,"
measured happiness and started
to begin to see what is it
that leads to happiness.
GILBERT: Psychologist
Ed Diener is a pioneer
in the study of happiness.
"Since 1980, he and
his collaborators"
"have crossed the
globe to measure it,"
"surveying diverse
communities from the
Maasai tribe in Africa,"
"to the Inuit of
northern Canada,"
to the Amish of
rural Pennsylvania
"and many, many others."
And the methods Diener uses are
as diverse as his subjects.
"DIENER: In happiness
research, we ask people
how happy they are"
on a one to ten scale.
We also look at brain waves.
You can look at hormones
"like cortisol that reflects
stress, for example."
You can also ask
family and friends
"how happy that person is,"
because family and friends see
how happy they say they are
and how happy they
act in everyday lives.
GILBERT: Diener has
gathered data on nearly
a quarter million people
"and has found that the happy
ones have better health,"
"better relationships, better
sex lives, better careers"
and better just about
everything else.
DIENER: We think thats
an evolutionary thing.
And the people who are happy
probably out-achieve the other
people and out-reproduce them
and theres more
of us around now.
"GILBERT: Dieners findings
have been confirmed
by psychologists,"
neuroscientists and
economists around the world.
We now know a great deal about
"what actually
makes people happy,"
and it isnt always
what we think.
What does happiness mean to you?
Im a firm believer
in money is happiness.
"Okay, I have to be honest."
My children cause
I love my children.
I like my summer camp the best.
Is that the best?
That makes you happy?
What do you do to
make yourself happier?
"Well, I dont mean
to be recalcitrant,"
but I dont do anything
in order to be happy.
Rolling down your
window and letting...
"turn the music on, letting
the breeze come in."
What would you say is your
greatest source of happiness?
"Well, I get a great
deal of happiness"
from beautiful jewelry.
Jewelry? Yes.
(laughter)
GILBERT: There are a lot
of different opinions
about what causes
"happiness, but
research suggests"
that not all of them
are exactly on target.
Do you think marriage is
a source of happiness?
BOTH: Most of the time.
Depends on what your
marriage is like.
What do you think
about marriage?
Do you think its a source of
happiness for most people? No.
What about marriage?
Do you think married people are
happier than unmarried people?
No.
I dont think theyre less happy;
I think it just depends.
"GILBERT: Not everyone lives
happily ever after, of course,"
"but studies do show
that on average,"
"married people are wealthier,"
"healthier and, yes,
happier than others."
Do you think children
make people happy?
I think so.
"I mean, I think theyll be
a part of my happiness."
Yes or no: do children
make you happy?
Mine do.
GILBERT: So what about
those bundles of joy?
"Well, studies show that parents
are no happier than non-parents"
and are often less happy.
GILBERT: Can money
buy happiness?
"No. No, it doesnt."
"Do you think money can buy
happiness, can bring happiness?"
No.
Does money buy happiness?
Not at all.
What about money?
Do you think money
makes people happy?
Absolutely.
And the more the better?
"For me, especially,
the more the better."
GILBERT: Guess what?
Money does cause happiness.
"On average, the more
money people have,"
the happier they tend to be.
"So, money? Yes."
Marriage? Probably.
Children? Not so much.
What science is
teaching us about these
"and many other things is that
they are related to happiness,"
but not necessarily in
the way you might think.
MAN: I grew up in
the South Bronx.
"We had every gang banger, the
Savage Skulls and the Bloods,"
and the this and the that.
It was difficult to survive.
And I was always one paycheck
away from being homeless.
"So, for two-and-a-half
years, every week,"
"regardless of what
the jackpot was,"
I would go in and
just play the lottery.
(chiming bell)
NEWSCASTER: Falcon
won $45 million.
He is New York's
single-largest winner ever.
Today the former starving artist
said hell take his winnings
and begin his dream performance:
a one-man show he calls
"""A Short Puerto Rican Guy
Sings Songs of Angst."""
"Now I can afford to rent
out a theater and do it,"
and do it the way
I want to do it.
Im a performance artist.
Usually people are
always telling me
"what it is I should be doing,
and I shouldnt be doing that,"
and I should be and now I'm
just gonna do it my way.
Flash
Bam
Wonderful you
Came by.
(applause)
FALCON: Life is change and
money is going to change you.
I moved into a
beautiful building.
"An uber-luxury apartment,
in an uber-luxury building."
I'm getting all the things
that I dreamt of getting.
Anything Italian is
a great pleasure.
(laughs)
It applies to so many things:
"the art, the clothing."
"All the good stuff is from
Italy; it just is, you know?"
"It's the fun of collecting, and
I've always been a collector."
"GILBERT: When people
are asked what would most
improve their lives,"
they almost always
say more money.
But are they right?
Weve done a lot of research
on money and happiness
over the last couple of
decades and what we find is
coming out of poverty
increases your happiness.
"So, if you take somebody
who wins a lottery,"
"and they were in financial
trouble, they had no money,"
it could make a significant
difference to their happiness.
"Now, on the other hand, what if
the richest man in the world"
wins a hundred-million lottery?
"And now, instead of
having 50 billion,"
he has 50 billion and
a hundred million.
It's nothing.
"So, it really does make a
difference where you start"
in terms of what kind of
impact money will make.
"GILBERT: When
it comes to happiness,
every dollar you earn"
buys just a little bit
less than the last one.
"Of course, if money
doesnt make you happy,"
then you just might not
be spending it right.
What we know about
lottery winners is that
"when they make changes in their
life and lose their friends,"
when they make changes in
their life and misspend money
"on drugs, and so forth,
from a number of cases,"
we know that that's going
to make you unhappy.
"On the other hand, some people
who use their money correctly,"
"and they use their money
to help their family,"
"they use their money
to help charity,"
those kind of people
can be happier.
"The thought came to me,"
"""Oh, my goodness, Ill
be able to, you know,"
"""send my niece and
nephew to college."
"I'll be able to
pay for college."""
And I got weak in the knees.
I never would have thought Id
be able to give them anything
but flying kites...
(laughs)
an occasional electrified
train or something.
"I mean, heres the idea"
"that they can go to
college, and any college."
"Oh, did the new money
strain any relationships?"
"Yes, quite a few."
There were friends
that Ive had...
"you know, well, all these..."
"all my friends were struggling
painters, writers, singers,"
"performance artists, whatever,"
and a few of them
couldn't handle it.
All of a sudden I became
something else to them
and they just
couldn't handle it.
Why?
"I don't know, cause
we stopped speaking."
"But you know, there are other
friends who did hang around"
and were still friends.
WOMAN: Hes very open.
You dont meet people that are
as open as he is that often.
"John is a person you can laugh
with, you can get serious with,"
you can argue with.
"And hes just a very
stimulating, fun,"
interesting man.
GILBERT: Lois Mirviss is one of
John Falcon's oldest friends.
She met him 20 years ago when
both were struggling artists.
"MIRVISS: Wow, these
are beautiful."
"GILBERT: After John won
the lottery, he hired Lois"
to help design and
decorate his home.
It needs to be longer
or thicker or something
just to be a little
more presentational.
But it's a beautiful doorknob.
MIRVISS: I dont know if I've
ever told this to John.
When my husband came
home and told me
"that John had won the lottery,
I got very concerned."
"I thought, ""Oh, poor John."
"What a responsibility."""
Money is fun.
"Money gives you the freedom
to do all kinds of things,"
but its also a burden.
And I've always
impressed with John.
I have to give him
credit for that.
"He's a frivolous man,
but hes not foolish."
And Ive watched him
take this responsibility
and to have fun and yet be
supportive to his family.
"So, hes taken all
of these elements"
"that are quite often misused,
and he's used them very well."
It takes a lot more
work to be happy
"than it does to be
unhappy, to be miserable."
Misery is so easy.
You can just go right into it.
"""I'm unhappy about this."
"""I don't like that color;
I dont like scallops."
"I don't like..."""
"You can just go right
into it, and just..."
"it snowballs, it snowballs."
But being happy/content
takes work.
You have to work at it.
"Yeah, I think so
far it's been fun."
But is it a life well lived?
I don't think a life well
lived depends on money.
"So, I don't know if
my life is well lived."
I think other people
have to judge that.
Anyone that tells you
"money doesnt bring happiness
is an ass, is a fool."
I think what happens
with more money
"is that there are
more highs available,"
"so theres more access to
shopping, drugs, trips,"
theres more access to highs.
"So if we call that happiness,
yeah, more available."
(laughs) But I don't
call that happiness.
"There is no key to happiness
in my book, except maybe,"
"you know, another $20 million
film, which will never happen."
(laughs)
"So, I can't look forward to,
like, great happiness ahead."
Money can't buy you fulfillment.
"It can, at some times,
buy you peace of mind,"
"but it cant make you a happier
person and, in some ways,"
knowing that makes you even
less of a happy person.
"GILBERT: So, what is
the relationship between
money and happiness?"
"Well, most of us think that if
we were a whole lot richer,"
wed be a whole lot happier.
But research shows this
isn't necessarily true.
"So, why do we all believe it?"
"Well, as it turns out,"
people arent very
good at predicting
what will and won't
make them happy.
"In a recent experiment,"
researchers went
to a health club
and asked a simple question.
Youre gonna live in the woods
for two days and two nights.
"You can have food or
water but not both,"
which would you rather have?
Food or water?
Food.
"Uh, I'd say food."
"Okay, circle that."
GILBERT: Some of the people
were asked this question
before they worked out.
Some were asked after
they worked out.
And when they were asked
made a huge difference
in how they answered.
"In fact, people were 50%
more likely to say ""water"""
if theyd just
finished working out
than if they were
about to start.
Water.
Definitely water.
GILBERT: Why?
"People were thirsty
after exercising,"
"and because they
were thirsty now,"
they imagined being
thirsty in the future.
This is something our
brains do all the time.
"When we think about how
well feel in the future,"
our thoughts are shaped by
how we feel in the present.
Its as if our brains cant
believe that we might feel
differently later
than we do now.
Thats not the only thing our
brains cant quite believe.
We all know that feelings
inevitably change over time--
"that new love fades,
that fresh wounds heal."
"And yet, when we imagine our
future joys and future sorrows,"
we tend not to think about
how time will change them.
We sure do have the
compelling intuition
"that somehow improving our life
circumstances, our situations,"
"whether it has to
do with relationships
or jobs or health,"
that that's going
to make us happier.
"And the truth is that
it does make us happier,"
but it doesnt make us happier
for as long or as intensely
as we think it would.
GILBERT: Psychologist
Sonja Lyubomirsky suggests
that were sadly mistaken when
we expect that the things
that make us happy for a day
will make us happy
for a lifetime.
"LYUBOMIRSKY: Its a phenomenon
called hedonic adaptation,"
which means that human
beings basically are just
"incredibly good at
getting used to,"
"getting accustomed to,
adapting positive changes,"
"especially in their lives, like
the new car or the new house."
And so thats one of the
reasons that we keep
sort of buying more
stuff is that we...
"you know, we get the handbag,
that gives us a boost."
It wears off and then
we get a new handbag.
GILBERT: Adaptation
affects our experience
of both good things
and bad things
in ways that we find
difficult to anticipate.
This is something my colleagues
and I have been studying
in the lab.
And wed be very happy to
give you one as a gift
for participating
in the experiment.
Which one would
you like to have?
"GILBERT: In one experiment,
we brought people into a room"
filled with art posters and
offered to give them one.
We told half of the participants
that their decision
was irreversible
"and that once theyd made it,"
they could never
change their minds.
We told the other half that
they could exchange the poster
they chose for a different
poster any time they wanted.
"After making their choices,"
we asked both groups
to rank their posters.
And guess what?
The people who knew they
couldnt exchange their posters
liked them more than the
people who knew they could.
Why? Because they had no choice.
And so they adapted.
The lesson of this
study was clear:
people find ways to like things
when they're stuck with them.
"When we cant change
our circumstances,"
we change the way we think
about those circumstances.
And yet most of us dont seem
to realize this will happen.
MAN: Theres a part of me that is
the most hyper person ever.
"The minute I was
born, I was running."
I was like a Red Bull baby.
GILBERT: Francesco Clark was
a young man with big dreams
when he moved to New York City
to take a job in publishing.
CLARK: It was very exciting.
"It was movies, it was
television, it was celebrities,"
it was everything that
a 22-year-old graduating
college kind of dreams of.
"GILBERT: Then, in
the blink of an eye,"
his life was forever
transformed.
"CLARK: I had a summer rental,
and I get to the house"
and there's a pool.
"And it was a nice summer day,"
so naturally I wanted
to go swimming.
"The second that I
dove into the pool,"
my chin hit the bottom
and my head snapped back.
"In one millisecond, my
life changed completely."
I was told I was going to
die three times that night.
I couldn't breathe on my own.
I was on a ventilator.
I had a tube going
down my mouth.
GILBERT: Francescos doctors said
that hed never be
able to move again.
CLARK: I was depressed
after the accident.
"That's a pretty
big change of life,"
"to then suddenly not be
able to eat on your own,"
"or not be able
to brush your teeth, or
to go to the bathroom."
"Its... you know, theres
a sense of embarrassment"
that comes with it at first.
"When you cant feed yourself,"
"when you cant scratch your
nose, it can drive you crazy."
"So, I just wanted to fix it."
"I just wanted to, you know,"
show them that I was
gonna get better.
I had to; I had no choice.
"I mean, what are you gonna do?"
Are you just gonna sit?
You're just gonna lay
in bed and wither away?
I didn't... I didn't
want to do that.
I wanted to... I wanted to live.
I started to feel better.
"It wasnt a specific day and
it wasnt a specific time,"
"but I realized that it wasnt
about my injury anymore,"
and it wasnt about this
metal frame that I sit on.
"It was more about, ""What do
I want to do with my life?"""
"GILBERT: After his
accident, Francesco moved
back in with his parents"
and began devoting long
hours to a grueling routine
of physical therapy.
CLARK: I do very intensive
physical therapy every day.
I pedal the special bike
with my arms and my legs.
I sit up.
I am relearning how to crawl.
"When I started to
move my arms again,"
"you know, six months before,"
"""Oh, you know, I can't
move my arm, that sucks."""
"But then moving it
again makes you realize,"
"""Oh, my God, you know,
this is incredible."
"""I can't believe I'm
starting to use my wrist."
"I can't believe I'm
moving my arm."""
"I mean, you're
moving your arm."
"When you dont have a
spinal cord injury,"
"you dont think about,"
"""God, Im so thankful
that I can breathe out
of my left lung."""
"I mean, you just... you
never think about that."
"GILBERT: In the years since,"
Francesco has learned to move
a lot more than just his body.
CLARK: I started a skin care
line called Clarks Botanicals.
That started because
of my injury.
I lost the ability to sweat.
"It looked like I had specks
of sand under each pore,"
"and it was red, it was flaky,
it was gray, it was sensitive."
It looked like it was aging.
"I was kind of like, ""Well, Ive
tried everything prescription,"
"Ive tried everything
over the counter."""
I started to look at essential
oils and botanical extracts.
"So, I had these, like, ugly
little vials that I would use."
"And then my sister
started using it,"
and then my mom started using it
and then my dad's patients
started using it.
"And then I was kind
of like, ""Hold on."
"""You know, this isnt, like..."
"""Im just making
this in the kitchen."
"I don't know what I'm doing."""
"So, it was very much an organic
evolution of my injury."
"GILBERT: Today,
Francescos products are
sold all over the world"
and he has the
schedule of a busy CEO:
"running his own
firm, writing a book"
and working with the
Christopher Reeve Foundation
as an advocate for
people with disabilities.
CLARK: I'm very happy now.
"I love every aspect of my
life, from work to my friends"
to being with my family
to thinking about
living an independent life.
I'm still pretty much
exactly who I was before.
"I laugh at the same jokes,
I love the same movies."
"I have the same
sense of curiosity,"
but I think that
everything is more...
(sighs)
"I don't know, Im just as
stupid as I was before."
It's just that I've
learned more about myself.
"GILBERT: The ability to
bounce back is admirable,
but it isnt unusual."
People who suffer a wide range
of traumas and tragedies
tend to recover more quickly
than they themselves
would have predicted.
"Yes, theyre sad,
theyre miserable,"
"theyre even devastated
for a while,"
but studies show that most
people end up being as happy
or nearly as happy
as they were before.
Resilience isn't rare.
"In fact, its very common."
There is some set
point to happiness
that you tend to return toward
and for some people
its very happy
and for other people
its mildly happy.
"And unfortunately, for a few
people it may not be happy."
But the set point is
good in the sense that
"when we have something terrible
in our life happen to us,"
"we get very depressed, we get
less satisfied with our life,"
"but slowly, over time, we come
back toward that set point."
GILBERT: This process is
critical to human happiness.
But how do we do it?
And why do some of us do it so
much more easily than others?
"For more than 15 years,
Dr. Dennis Charney"
has been studying people whove
shown exceptional resilience
"after trauma,"
from survivors of
natural disasters...
to prisoners of war...
to the firemen who responded
when the World Trade Center
was attacked on September 11.
CHARNEY: It was fascinating to
deal with resilient individuals
"because when you met them, you
looked at them and thought,"
"""Well, how did you...
how did you do this?"""
"You start thinking,
""Could I have done that?"
"How did they do it?"""
GILBERT: One of Charneys
most interesting subjects
"was Bob Shumaker, a
former Navy pilot."
SHUMAKER: I grew up on a
farm in western Pennsylvania.
"My parents were middle class,"
so I consider myself
fairly average.
But average people get thrown
into extraordinary situations.
"GILBERT: Bobs ordeal
began in 1965,"
when he was assigned to
combat duty in Vietnam.
Hed just been married
and had a son.
"Then, suddenly, life as
he knew it came to an end."
SHUMAKER: The mission I was on
was just north of the
demilitarized zone
that separated North
Vietnam from South Vietnam.
We were really low and I pulled
out right over a flak site.
(explosions)
And they managed to hit
me in the tail section
and the plane
flipped upside down
"and I ejected and the
parachute fortunately opened,"
but opened only 35
feet above the ground
and so I broke my
back as I landed.
"That was it, you know,
they got me, they bound me,"
had handcuffs on me behind
my back and marched me off.
"GILBERT: For eight years,
Shumaker was shuttled"
"between North
Vietnamese prisons,"
"including the
infamous Hanoi Hilton,"
where he was brutally tortured.
SHUMAKER: The really worst
technique was what wed call
"the rope treatment, where
they would tie a rope"
"from your handcuffs,
up over your shoulders,"
"and down to your feet,"
and they would
tighten this thing up
so that eventually your
head would reach your feet.
"And you think it cant
happen, you know,"
"particularly when your
knees are straight, but..."
"it was excruciating,"
and then they jammed an
iron bar down my throat
to keep me from screaming.
"So, that was the technique
that would get you to condemn"
your own grandmother
if you had to.
GILBERT: The torture Shumaker
endured was not just physical.
"For almost three years, he was
held in solitary confinement."
"SHUMAKER: There were 11
of us in cells, no windows"
and a solitary light
bulb hanging down
that burned 24 hours a day.
"GILBERT: To deal
with his isolation,"
Shumaker imagined the
house that he would build
for his young family
if he ever returned.
Im almost embarrassed to admit
to you that there would be days
when I would spend
maybe ten or 12 hours
just thinking about how many
bricks were in this house.
"I knew that there were, say,
5,227 nails in the thing,"
so many board feet of lumber.
Id spend a year and a half
designing the perfect house
"and then one day Id say,
""Well, what would happen"
"if I moved the fireplace from
this room to that room?"""
Itd send me back to square one
and I'd redesign the thing.
GILBERT: Although Shumaker
was physically isolated
"from the other prisoners,"
together they created an
ingenious form of communication.
SHUMAKER: We developed
a tap code in which the
alphabet was arranged
in a square that had five
rows and five columns.
Youd say (tapping)...
"thats the second
row, second column,"
"this is ""G""."
(tapping)
"First row, second
column-- ""B""--"
"and ""U"" is..."
(tapping)
"Fourth row, fifth
column is the ""U"","
"so ""GBU"" was
""God bless you."""
"So the tap code really
kept our spirits alive,"
"our hopes alive, our dreams."
So we transmitted things like
French lessons through the wall
and music lessons and how
to fix a television set
"and biology lessons,"
so we spent a lot
of time on the wall.
"GILBERT: These
conversations were crucial
to Shumakers survival,"
and they became a focus of
Dennis Charneys research.
CHARNEY: Social
support is a key factor
in becoming a
resilient individual.
You can't do it alone.
You need other people.
I think the tap code
experience of the POWs
is among the most
important lessons.
"And we use the phrase,
""Everybody needs a tap code."""
Everybody needs a way of
communicating with other people
"to establish friendships
that are supportive,"
"to establish relationships
that provide you a guidepost,"
as you get through tough times.
GILBERT: Charney also discovered
that highly resilient people
tended to share some
other qualities as well.
"They tended to have strong
religious or moral beliefs,"
"strong role models, and a
strong streak of optimism."
It was not a
unrealistic optimism.
They were able to accurately
apprise themselves
of what they were facing.
"So, it wasnt denial."
They knew that they
had been traumatized
or they were facing a
very difficult situation.
"But they had an ability
to be optimistic,"
that somehow that
they would prevail.
SHUMAKER: I only received
seven letters in eight years
"and the letters were...
occasionally were pessimistic,"
like telling me my
mother had suddenly died
and things like that.
"And you just have to be able
to, you know, just suck it up"
and reach down
somewhere in your soul
and come out with the
wherewithal to overcome
the present circumstances and
be upbeat and get on with it.
"GILBERT: After eight
years of captivity,"
"Bob Shumaker was
finally released,"
his spirit unbroken by
the horrors he endured.
The first thing he
did was call his wife.
WOMAN: I wondered
who this man was.
I didnt know him very much.
We had a very short courtship.
Our baby was born
just five weeks
before Bob was shot
down and captured.
"I remember this
phone call saying,"
"""Hi, honey,"" and
that literally erased
eight years of time."
"It's hard to explain that, but
that was the person I knew."
And that was the person
that returned home.
GILBERT: Shumaker had done
more than just survive.
"In his view, he had grown."
I suppose one way of looking
at eight years of imprisonment
"is to say, ""Hey,
thats just wasted time."
"You know, I have to put that
behind me, its unfortunate."""
"But, paradoxically,
I gained something"
out of this eight
years of experience.
"GILBERT: In the years
after his release,"
"Shumaker became a rear
admiral, a college professor,"
"a devoted husband and father,"
and he turned the house
that hed so often imagined
into a reality.
"SHUMAKER: It was something in
my soul I just had to get out,"
"you know, and see
to fulfillment."
I wanted a house that had
a lot of openness to it
and I think that was probably as
a result of my being confined
"without windows or anything,"
so the house I designed
has a lot of glass.
"I was deprived of freedom
for such a long time,"
I think I really cherish freedom
more than most people do now.
"CHARNEY: Bob, like
almost all the other POWs"
"that we interviewed and
got to know very well,"
"said that, to the
following question,"
"""If you couldve eliminated the
POW experience from your life,"
"would you do so?"""
"In other words, you couldve
just wiped that out,"
it never happened.
"And Bob, like many of
the others, said, ""No,"
"""because I learned
things about myself
during that experience,"
"""and I learned tools--"
"""psychological tools, tools
in which to handle my life,"
"""that I probably could never
have learned in any other way."
"And so it stood me
in good stead for the
rest of my life."""
SHUMAKER: Being a prisoner
really focuses on whats
essential in life.
There are a lot of things we can
do without and still be happy.
CHARNEY: The key lessons
from Bob Shumakers story
are that inside almost all of
us is the capacity to overcome
the most horrific of
stresses in our life
and even ultimately learn
from that stress and thrive
and grow as a person.
MAN: You learn resilience
by falling down and
getting back up again.
"And as you fall down and
get back up again, you say,"
"""Oh, my God, Im...
Im back up again."
"""The setback or the
failure that I thought"
"""I would never recover from,"
"""in fact Ive recovered
from perfectly well,"
"which means that I
can do that again."""
WOMAN: My resilience has been
slowly learning to trust
that whatever path I
take can be positive.
"You know, even the worst
decisions Ive made have had,"
"you know, positive
ramifications if I choose
to learn from them."
"Well, I want to make
sure that people know"
"that Im happy that I had
a messed-up childhood,"
"that Im glad I was damaged,"
"because it made
me a better actor,"
"it made me a better writer,
it made me a better creator."
So I thank my family for that.
I wouldnt trade it for
anything in the world.
"Then I would
have, but not now."
"GILBERT: Human beings have
a talent for adapting,"
a talent for finding happiness
where wed least expect it.
But if we can adapt to a
lifetime in a wheelchair
"or a decade in prison,"
then why cant we adapt
to the ordinary misfortunes
of everyday life?
The answer is that adaptation
is something the mind does
when there's nothing
else it can do.
"We adapt to misfortunes when
we know we cant change them,"
"but when we stand a
fighting chance, we fight."
And that's why we struggle so
much with temporary misfortunes.
MAN: I was always good at math.
My dad worked in finance.
When I was in high school
I took an economics class
where you had to pick stocks
and I just always liked it.
"Went to college,
studied it there."
"My brother was on Wall
Street at the time,"
"he helped me get my first job,"
"and, uh, ten years later, here
I am, unemployed in a chair."
GILBERT: Bill OConnor was a bond
salesman at Lehman Brothers
when Wall Street began to
collapse in the spring of 2008.
"He and his wife
Stephanie had a new baby,"
"a new apartment
in New York City,"
and they knew they
were in trouble.
"OCONNOR: A lot of
people describe it that
when you join a bank,"
"theres like a bullet and
on that day that you join,"
"they inscribe your name
on it, and someday,"
"if you stay there long enough,
that bullet will be fired."
"GILBERT: Bill saw a lot of
his friends being laid off,"
and he worried about
what would happen to him.
"But when the axe finally fell,"
Bill did something
a bit unusual.
"Steph was on maternity leave,"
and she planned to have a
sabbatical before going back
"to work, so she was planning
on having six months."
"I said, ""You know, I
dont think I want to..."
"""just start pounding the
pavement, looking for a job."
"Why don't... what do you
think if we buy an RV?"""
(laughing)
"And I said, ""I
think you're crazy."""
"And his mom was living here,"
"and she said, ""I
think you're crazy."""
Yeah.
Wasn't a well-received
idea at first.
"I found a very cheap
Winnebago online,"
spent the summer
together as a family
driving around the country.
Were just going to break
away for a little while.
GILBERT: Why would you buy
an RV if you lost your job
and had a new baby?
"Well, research on
happiness suggests that
Bill and Stephanie"
may have been spending their
money wisely by investing
in a shared experience
rather material goods.
O'CONNOR: It was great.
You get up in the morning
and you go out and
have lunch by a lake
or you go swimming.
It was just time together.
There's just freedom.
"You can just be driving
along and you see something,"
"and you say, ""That
looks interesting;
let's stop there."""
"""All right, let's
stop there."""
"You know, we went and saw the
six-legged cow in Kansas."
It was a once-in-a-lifetime
experience.
STEPHANIE: I think it
really turned out to be
one of the best things we
could have done for ourselves.
"GILBERT: But no
vacation lasts forever,"
"and when Bill and Stephanie
returned to New York,"
Bills unemployment began to seem
much less like an opportunity
and much more like a problem.
OCONNOR: Coming back to
New York was not good.
I was coming back
to play Mr. Mom
"and look for a job that, you
know, doesn't seem to be there."
OCONNOR: What time do you
have to go to work tomorrow?
You're just working
in the office?
STEPHANIE: Im working
in the office.
"GILBERT: With their vacation
a rapidly vanishing memory,"
Bill found himself
struggling to adjust to life
as a stay-at-home father.
What else do I have
to do this week?
Itd be great if you can
get to the grocery store.
Because were pretty limited in
what we have in the fridge.
"Now we're going to shop, bud."
"Is Tide really worth six
dollars more, Matty?"
Your mothers using
generic right now.
"This could cause
a disagreement, but
we're getting it."
"These look identical, friend."
Think you're going generic.
"Congratulations, you've
just saved us $12."
"OCONNOR: I hate
expensive grocery stores,
so I opt to go across"
to New Jersey to Pathmark
or Shoprite or something.
We get toilet paper... we
didnt get toilet paper yet.
Goodness. (sighs)
We have to reorganize.
OCONNOR: Its bizarre
to have gone from a world
where I put on my headset
in the morning and I had
150 phone lines and...
"Im kind of lost without
that, without the dialogue,"
without the interaction.
"And then just the confusion
of, ""Where am I going?"""
"I don't know, I have no idea."
On your back.
Smile.
O'CONNOR: The challenging
thing... it's a full-time job.
Ive opted for a full-time job.
(baby coos)
"Matty, whatcha doing?"
"When you just want a moment,
you can't have a moment,"
so that's exhausting.
(dog panting)
(baby crying)
OCONNOR: I never saw
myself doing the job
Im doing right now.
It's bizarre.
"STEPHANIE: You could tell
when he had a successful day,"
"when he had a good deal,
it was so fun for him."
He loved what he did.
"When he lost his job,"
it seemed like he really
lost part of his identity.
"O'CONNOR: You question,
you know, ""Why me?"
"How could they
possibly pick me?"""
"I still send instant messages
to the guy who I sat next to,"
"like were chit-chatting,
you know, every day, so..."
"The relationships
are still there,"
but its like you got kicked
off the train or something.
You gotta watch that thing
keep going down the tracks.
"GILBERT: Bills
struggle isnt over yet,"
and theres no telling
how long it will go on.
"For now, one thing is clear:
Playing the role of Mr. Mom"
doesn't seem to suit
him all that well.
"Being unemployed obviously
makes us unhappy,"
but the reasons arent
entirely financial.
"When someone asks us
who we are, we often
tell them what we do,"
because work is more
than a way to make money;
it's a part of our identity.
"Thats why when
we lose our jobs,"
we lose a piece of ourselves.
The same is true of illness.
"Being sick makes us unhappy,"
but the reasons are
not entirely medical.
"Illness, like unemployment, can
tear a hole in our identities"
and leave us wondering
who we really are.
WOMAN: My hair was me.
"My hair was red, full,
curly, shiny, long."
So I was all hair.
"It had a presence,
and I had a presence."
GILBERT: Michele Gossett was
a 51-year-old single mother
when she learned that
she had ovarian cancer.
GOSSETT: Losing my hair
was probably one of the
most devastating things
that happened to
me with my cancer.
I lost my hair in one day...
and I thought that
I lost my identity.
"I thought I lost my
soul, I lost my strength."
I actually have a different
hairstyle almost every day.
"For instance, I'll wear my
pink wig when I feel playful."
My red hair with the roots
I think looks very natural
and I put that on to
kind of even me out
but with a little edge.
The brown ones... they more
or less resemble a hairstyle
that I would possibly
adapt myself.
And then I have little
short sassy ones.
And those are fun
just for a change.
Sometimes it's not easy.
"Sometimes I'll get up and look
at the wigs and... ""Why?"""
I realize I still have cancer.
So sometimes it doesn't
really cut through that.
(indistinct train
station announcement)
I worry about my daughter.
Natalie is absolutely
the apple of my eye.
She is my pride and joy.
And Natalie and I have been
through a lot together.
"I was a nurse,"
worked in critical care
for a number of years.
"Oh, its so nice to see you."
I decided to go to
anesthesia school.
When I finished school I had
a promise of a wonderful job
with a fabulous salary.
I had a house on the water.
My dreams were that Natalie
and I could live a secure life
"in my future,"
and that didn't materialize.
"I was diagnosed two weeks
after my graduation,"
and I'm on
chemotherapy right now.
My fears with my illness lie
in that Natalie might
not have her mother.
Natalie is as important
to me as myself.
"So, how are you feeling?"
"Well, I'm really tired."
"It went well,
everything went great."
GILBERT: Michele is struggling
with her fear and anxiety.
"And like many others
in the same situation,"
shes turning to the self-help
industry for advice.
GOSSETT: Im just looking for
secrets to find inner peace.
I'm using aromatherapy.
"Aromatherapy baths,
aromatherapy around my home."
Im living and eating
more organic food.
Ive found that I have been
reading a lot of self-help books
"lately, inspirational readings,
inspirational writers."
"William Dyer,
Marianne Williamson,"
"Louise Hay, different authors."
"""You can heal
yourself"" type things."
"And I think thats
what we all want,"
we want to enjoy life.
(cheers and applause)
GOSSETT: And its so pressing
for me to try and find these
because I feel Im
reaching a desperation
to find the meaning of life.
GILBERT: Michele is
one of the thousands
who attended Louise
Hays conference.
GOSSETT: What I wanted to gain
from going to the conference
"was keys, tricks, guidance."
"""The healing has
begun. Life loves you."""
Thank you so much.
"GILBERT: As a trained nurse,
she isnt quite ready to believe"
"that cancer can be cured
by aromatherapy, crystals,"
or positive thinking.
GOSSETT: Im not willing
to give up my chemotherapy
"for alternative therapies,"
because Ive seen tragic
outcomes from that.
"They said, ""I'm just
going to have a vegan diet"
"""and Im gonna
think positively,"
"""and thats how Im gonna
live out the rest of my life"
"because this will cure me."""
"And their cancer just
metastasized to their brain,"
"their bone, their lungs,
and they were done."
I'm not ready to
take that chance.
"When I put myself in
your position, I think,"
"""If somebody told me that
the reason I have cancer"
"""is that I had the
wrong thoughts,"""
"is there a part of you that
thinks, ""Give me a break""?"
I've-I've thought about it.
"Because I said, ""Okay, if its
dis-ease in my body somewhere"
"""and it manifests
in my cancer,"
"""is it something from my
childhood? Is it an anger?"
"Is it someone I
won't forgive?"""
"That could lead to, I would
think, maybe, a stomach ulcer."
Would it lead to cancer?
Gynecological cancer?
I dont know.
I dont know about that.
"GILBERT: There is, of course,
no scientific evidence"
to suggest that self-help
techniques can cure cancer
or any serious physical malady.
But what about other
kinds of problems--
"problems like addiction, or
depression, or marital strife?"
"For many people, self-help
appears to be a simple"
and inexpensive alternative
to therapy or counseling.
But do these techniques
actually work?
"Well, Im a big proponent
of decent self-help."
"Here we go, Dan, self-help."
"GILBERT: Over the
last 20 years,"
psychology professor
John Norcross
"has directed a systematic study
of the self-help industry,"
examining over a thousand
different books and programs.
NORCROSS: We should
be cheering about the
proliferation of self-help.
Approximately 75% of those
who successfully changed
a behavior or relationship
have done so on their own
without professional treatment.
Self-help is the major pathway
to how most of us grow.
At the same time there
are inherent limitations
"to self-help,"
and not all the stuff out
there is particularly good.
Great book.
And then a not-so-great book.
GILBERT: Norcross worries
that whats advertised
as expert advice...
All on the same shelf.
"Yes, right next to each other."
GILBERT: ...is often nothing
more than untested opinion.
More than 95% of all
self-help books are published
without any scientific research
attesting to their
effectiveness or safety.
And we estimate more than 99%
of the Internet self-help sites
are launched without
any scientific research
attesting to their value.
"So youre not just saying that
some self-help is worthless,"
youre saying that some of
its positively dangerous.
"Without any regulation and
without scientific research,"
"its a ""buyer beware"""
and theyre not sure
what theyre getting.
I remember someone
once comparing it
to taking a two-year-old
toddler on a walk.
"As youre walking around,"
the toddler will
occasionally pick up
perhaps something of value but
mostly theyre just picking up
dirt and germs.
GILBERT: Self-help offers
quick and easy solutions
to complex problems.
Thats why its so appealing
and so profitable
from the corners of
your local bookstore
to the media capitals
of the world.
"And yet, despite
the proliferation"
"of self-proclaimed experts,"
huge numbers of Americans
get psychological advice
from just one man.
"GILBERT: So, who brought who?"
WOMAN: It's a ritual.
"At 5:00, when he comes
on in our area, is
when the TV goes on."
"We see Dr. Phil,
then have dinner."
I like Dr. Phil.
I like his whole family; you
just feel like a part of it.
How long have you been
watching Dr. Phil?
"Well, when he was first
on Oprah years ago,"
I wouldnt watch it on that day
because I thought
he was so mean.
"I was like, ""He's
so hard on people."""
"I mean, now I think thats
what I like about him,"
"is that hes just very direct,"
"just the way he does, like,"
"the ""Hows it workin for
ya?"" thing, you know?"
"""If it's not working, stop
doing it,"" so I like that."
"Its like the type of
family that I come from,"
you don't talk
about your issues.
"You just kind of, you know,
push it under the rug"
"and you dont repeat
it, because there's a
lot of shame involved."
"And so Dr. Phil,
he brings it out."
Its almost like an accelerated
way to fix your problem.
"Because you can beat
around the bush for years,"
"or you can just, you know,
nip it in the bud right then."
(audience cheers)
DR. PHIL: And so your
goal is to inflict pain.
"WOMAN: It becomes my goal,"
but I dont think that
when we start fighting
"that thats my goal,"
but it becomes my
goal during the fight.
"Are you proud of
that? No, Im not."
"No, come on, be
serious about it."
"Im not, Im not. Dont
give me that crap."
GILBERT: Dr. Phil is
clearly a showman.
But hes also a
trained psychologist
who respects
scientific evidence.
DR. PHIL: I have a staff of
over 300 people on this show
and many of them
are researchers.
"So theyll get into
the psych abstracts,"
"the medical abstracts, the
sociological literature,"
and pull out those cutting-edge
overviews of everything
that is at least the
current understanding.
"In my journey through the
land of psychotherapy,"
"looking into self-help,
meeting therapists,"
going to self-help conferences
I found that theres huge
distinctions to be made
between different
sources of help.
I think science
informs practice.
I think practice
informs science.
"And if you dont
have that exchange,"
I think youre gonna miss some
really important elements.
"But Im not one of those
people that thinks, you know,"
you can think your
way to illness
or you can think
your way to health.
I think its a
multifaceted aspect.
"GILBERT: Dr. Phil is in
the helping business,"
but hes also in the
entertainment business...
Im going to tell them and
you how to fight fair.
GILBERT: ...and he knows what
it takes to keep ratings high.
Ill tell him that
he sucks in bed;
its just one more
way to hurt him.
"GILBERT: In the end,
a television show
is no substitute"
for professional help...
"A lot of couples go through
this kind of thing,"
which is why Im talking to yall.
GILBERT: ...something Dr.
Phil appears to recognize.
"DR. Phil: A lot of people
at home are thinking,"
"""Whew, my marriage isnt as
bad as I thought it was."""
GILBERT: People watch your show
"hoping to get
answers, and they do."
"Some people watch your show
hoping to get all the answers,"
"and, of course, they don't."
"Dan, Ive never been
under the misconception"
that were doing eight-minute
cures on the Dr. Phil show.
What we do try and do is
give people a wake-up call.
"To get themselves thinking, to
get themselves considering."
But this is just that--
its a beginning place.
"It should open a dialogue, it
should open a thought process."
It should cause them to maybe
write down five questions
to ask their therapist or their
doctor the next time they go in
"and see em, or to discuss
with their spouse that night."
Then that's a great thing.
"If they take it beyond that,"
"I think theyre trying to do
too much with the platform,"
too much with the venue.
GILBERT: Dr. Phil is
undoubtedly helping some people
"by reducing the
stigma of therapy,"
but dealing with life's
problems is hard work.
"Self-help programs often focus
on changing how we think,"
but research suggests that
it can be more effective
to change how we behave.
And one program in particular
has a track record
of doing just that.
"MAN: I had a
perfect childhood,"
two parents who loved me and
loved me unconditionally;
I lacked for nothing.
"GILBERT: William Cope
Moyers, son of veteran
journalist Bill Moyers,"
found out at a young age
that all the family support
in the world wasn't enough.
MOYERS: There was something
going on inside of me
that wasnt satisfied
by all of those external factors
that would typically define
happiness or success.
I was struggling with
the sense of purpose
and the sense that I
wasn't good enough.
I discovered the solution
to this hole in the soul.
I could medicate it in a way
that required me only to use
mood- and mind-altering
substances.
I didn't have to try so
hard anymore to be happy.
hard anymore to be perfect.
I could just get high.
Taking drugs and drinking
probably became a problem
from the moment I did them.
"And Im convinced that once
I took a drink or a drug,"
I was off to the races.
"GILBERT: By the time
he was in his 20s,"
Moyers addiction had
consumed his life.
MOYERS: My fix
was crack cocaine.
So I was using...
thousand dollars a week?
"You know, the
money didnt matter."
"I mean, it did, but it didn't."
I was doing anything
to get high.
My problem wasnt having
money in my pocket;
I had money in my pocket.
My problem was
finding my connection.
"My bottom was on the morning
of October 12 of 1994,"
"when, in a full-blown
relapse from my addiction,"
"I was in a crack house
in Atlanta, Georgia,"
"and this simple question popped
into my head: ""Now what?"""
"And for the first time in my
life, I did not have an answer."
"Its a simple
question, ""Now what?"
"Now what am I gonna do?"""
I didn't have the answer.
GILBERT: The key
to his recovery?
"Moyers joined the worlds
best-known self-help program,"
Alcoholics Anonymous.
"AA is a free, peer-based
support group that
offers daily meetings"
in just about every city
and town in the nation.
NORCROSS: Theres
decades of research now
"investigating the effectiveness
of 12-step groups,"
"including AA, NA and so forth."
And the research is
quite supportive.
Regular participation is an
incredibly positive factor.
"The key is that sense of
validation, of universality,"
that were all in
this boat together.
"MOYERS: I mean,
in AA we realize its
really pretty simple."
This isn't rocket science.
It's about togetherness.
"It's about ""we."""
Its about realizing that
we dont have to go through
lifes highs and lows
all by ourselves.
"KEITH HUMPHREYS: If Im an
alcoholic, I have to decide,"
"""Am I going to drink?"""
"I can go to the bar, where
it would be harder for me."
I can go to an AA meeting.
I can seek out friends who
will help me in my recovery;
I can seek out friends who will
ask me to go out for a beer.
"GILBERT: Keith Humphreys,"
"a psychiatry professor
at Stanford University,"
has studied AA
for over 15 years.
Hes identified social support--
or what the folks in
AA call fellowship--
as being the key to its success.
"In my career, Ive studied"
"a very broad range of
treatments for addiction,"
and there are many
different things that work.
"Um, but none of them will
fully supplant, I think,"
the power of a fellowship
that can really become
a part of a persons life for
years and years and years.
And AA has definitely
figured that out.
MOYERS: Im in that
meeting with those people
because theyre
exactly like I am.
"And so Joe, who I may
know from ten years ago,"
"stands up and says,
""My name is Joe"
"""and Im coming back
after a relapse."
"I got six days."""
"I go, ""Oh yeah, that's
what this is all about."""
And then an old-timer gets
up and shares something
"on one of the
steps and he says,"
"""My name is Bob and Ive
been sober for 40 years,"""
"and I say, ""Ah yes, that's
what this is all about."""
"HUMPHREYS: AA creates
many, many opportunities"
for people to be
helpful to others--
bring in the chairs
and set up the coffee--
but in most cases it's
more involved than that:
leading a meeting or
sponsoring other people
to help them through
the recovery process.
And what research has shown
"is that the people who
sponsor other members,"
the people who
hold their hand out
and support new
members in recovery
are more likely to
stay sober themselves.
"So thats, I think, part
of the genius of AA,"
"to recognize that to get help,
one also needs to give it away."
GILBERT: Moyers is now the
executive director of advocacy
"at Hazelden, a drug and
alcohol treatment center"
that employs
principles based on AA.
"MOYERS: I used to
always believe that when
Im on my death bed,"
"Ill probably get
high one more time,"
just to go through
it one more time.
"No, I want to die sober."
There is no cure
for my alcoholism.
There is a solution and
the solution is recovery.
Recovery includes
going to meetings.
GILBERT: AA meetings
often end with a prayer:
"""God grant me the serenity"
"""to accept the things
I cannot change,"
"""the courage to
change the things I can"
"and the wisdom to
know the difference."""
That wisdom is
critical for everyone.
"And yet, knowing what
can and cant be changed"
isnt always easy.
Most of us find
it hard to accept
that some of the
wrongs weve suffered
simply can't be righted.
STEPHEN ROWELL: Ive been
struggling with forgiveness
for quite some time.
"Eight years, to be exact."
I had an accident
that changed my life.
I was in New Orleans.
It was the weekend of my
younger brother's wedding.
And we were on a balcony at a
club and the railing gave way.
"There was a gentleman to my
left, who started to go over."
His natural reaction
was to reach and grab
hold of something
and what he grabbed was me.
"And we went free-falling
all the way to the street,"
which is about 30 feet below.
I felt like I was going
to die that night.
And it's still hard
to think about it.
GILBERT: Stephen Rowell
continues to suffer
from nerve damage
and debilitating seizures.
But even worse is
the emotional toll
that his accident has taken.
ROWELL: Ive been
holding a lot of anger
and just a lot of pretty
horrific emotions
in regards to the club owner.
"It seemed that, you
know, every time I felt
like I might be able"
"to let go, I would
have a seizure."
And I look back at
some of my journals.
I was really angry about this.
And relentlessly unforgiving.
And it just kept
me in that place.
It kept me sort of
trapped in that place.
"FRED LUSKIN: And again, one
more time, breathe in fully."
"GILBERT: At the suggestion
of his therapist,"
Stephen has enrolled
in a forgiveness class
"at Stanford University,"
"a five-week program
designed to alleviate anger,"
stress and depression.
"This is a guided, educational
practice in forgiveness."
I lead you through a
series of practices
"that at the end, you
become less attached"
to a certain negative
point of view
about something thats
happened to you.
Im going to ask a few
of you just to talk
about what brings you here.
How about you?
"You know, Im being sued by
somebody whos, you know,"
"I... there's no basis, I
mean, it's just painful."
"A bad childhood, you know, had
somehow anchored, you know, me"
into a pit of negativity.
But Im getting to
the point where...
LUSKIN: What I see is so often
people have become paralyzed
"because their
anger hasnt worked,"
they have no idea
what else is available
and are stuck by something
thats not working.
"Anger, over time,
becomes less helpful."
It actually becomes crippling.
ROWELL: And sometimes I cant
get beyond.
Thats right.
...whats happened in the past.
So what would forgiveness be?
"Youre right, and
what would it mean"
to forgive?
"Well, for me it would
mean everything."
Somebody else.
GILBERT: Dr. Fred Luskin
created this program in 1999.
"Since then, it's been
tested around the globe."
"LUSKIN: We worked with people
from Northern Ireland,"
from both sides
of that conflict.
We have really good data
that it was helpful to them.
"People would come,
some of whom..."
"whose children had been
murdered decades ago,"
and it was just
eating them alive.
"And we taught them
things about forgiveness,"
and we could show that it
made a significant difference.
So what would be a
question out of that?
"LUSKIN: They had reduced
depression, reduced anger,"
"physical improvements, reduced
stress and more hopefulness."
"LUSKIN: Does thinking
that someone doesnt
deserve compassion,"
does that help
solve your problem?
"No, it doesn't."
Does thinking
that someone doesnt
deserve compassion
help you feel at peace?
No.
So why do you continue to do it?
"GILBERT: In each class,
Luskin provides exercises
to help students see"
"that they cant control
what happened to them,"
but they can control
how they think about it.
The idea is to get people to see
"that even though their
anger is justified,"
it isn't hurting
anyone but them.
LUSKIN: So the theme
through all of this is:
Is the way youre dealing
with it helpful to you?
"If it is, keep it."
"If it's not, change it."
Try being more grateful.
Try being more compassionate.
Try telling a different story.
Try arguing yourself out
of feeling so entitled.
"Any one of those
things can work,"
"but the first recognition is,
I may not be helping myself."
"If you do the same old same
old, expect the same result."
And don't blame
anybody else for that.
Because we get something
out of being righteous.
We get something.
"It's a substitute
for happiness, but
we get something."
ROWELL: Dr. Luskin
kind of provoked me.
I actually left our second
class very frustrated
because I disagreed with him.
"But, you know, I went back"
"and kind of really
thought about what he
was saying, and..."
that's where I started
to see a shift.
"You know, what is it about me?"
"You know, asking myself,
what is it about me"
that I can do to change things?
I really felt sort
of a breakthrough
"in taking the class,"
that it was sort
of a turning point.
"Following the course, I..."
"I called my attorney and
said, ""Im ready to settle."
"""Im ready to just
put this behind me"
"and start moving forward."""
I have reached a point
of forgiving this man.
I feel like I can finally
join the living again.
And I can't tell you how
incredibly uplifting that is.
GILBERT: One way
to change your life
is to identify your
weaknesses and fix them.
"But recently, some
researchers have suggested"
"that rather than worrying
about our weaknesses,"
"we should instead learn to
capitalize on our strengths,"
and theyre developing
programs to accomplish this--
"programs that are
inspired by self-help,"
but that are
grounded in science.
"The question is, what
self-help actually works,"
and what self-help is
false and doesn't work?
GILBERT: Psychologist Martin
Seligman is a professor
at the University
of Pennsylvania
and one of the leaders
of a new movement
he calls positive psychology.
I realized that psychology
had been all about whining
"and suffering and anxiety,
depression, victims,"
"suicide, drug addiction,"
"and I had spent 35 years
working on those things,"
but that that was half-baked.
"Were pretty good at misery,"
but what we werent good at was
what made life worth living.
GILBERT: What distinguishes
positive psychology
from any other
kind of self-help?
"According to Seligman, it isn't
the message, but the method."
"We do random-assignment,
placebo-controlled studies"
and ask: does that make people
happier six months later
and less depressed?
So this is an empirically
based endeavor
and a scientifically
based endeavor.
GILBERT: Positive psychology
has gotten a lot of attention
and its programs are now being
implemented all over the world
"in businesses, in hospitals,
and even in the military."
"At West Point, the
U.S. Army is hoping"
that positive
psychology training
will enhance leadership skills
and make officers more resilient
in the face of battle.
COLONEL PAT SWEENEY: The
graduates from West Point know
"that theyre going out,"
and theyre going to lead
men and women in combat.
"And in ten to 12 months, theyll
report to their first unit,"
"and, you know, depending on
their combat deployment cycle,"
"they may be reporting straight
into Iraq or Afghanistan,"
and theyll be responsible for
the lives of 45 men and women.
"If you were the commander
of a lost battalion,"
"in combat, in dire situation,"
what character strengths
did you rely on
that were important for
leadership in combat?
"WOMAN: Everyone always thinks
of physical leadership,"
but in this situation
its that mental leadership
that you were talking about.
I think of the
optimism and the hope
that he is providing for them.
"If you know what
youre good at,"
you can be mindful
of those skills
and then use them
when you need them.
And I think that's what
this course is all about.
"GILBERT: Psychologist
Chris Peterson, a
colleague of Seligmans,"
has helped create this new
program for West Point.
PETERSON: What we have
found in our research
over the past decade
"is that you cant cultivate
the whole of character,"
but you can certainly
cultivate its components.
Right-- youre 100% correct.
SWEENEY: The cadets really
like positive psychology
"because instead of
focusing on weaknesses,"
"what it is, is its a
focus on your strengths,"
"and certain strengths may
be at different levels,"
"but what were doing is saying,"
"""Hey, lets take that strength
and lets build on it."""
GILBERT: Petersons programs
revolve around the idea
"that if you want to
develop your character,"
you have to identify
your strengths
and use them over
and over again.
PETERSON: Most of the
interventions that have
been created to date
are based on a
very simple premise
that you are what you do.
"And if you do more
of these things,"
then youll be more of
whatever they represent.
"So, how frequently
are you kind?"
How often are you a leader?
You start to keep track of that
and then you start to
try to increase it.
"And youre measuring
it all along,"
so you can see your progress.
GILBERT: West Point
is now testing
the effectiveness of
Petersons programs
and the outcome is uncertain.
"Nonetheless, the
Army is creating"
a positive psychology training
course that will be required
for all its soldiers.
And positive psychology is
also being used by civilians
like Bill OConnor.
"Yeah, it hasn't been a
good couple of weeks."
"GILBERT: Bill still
faces a bad economy, with
no jobs and no prospects."
How do you focus on doing
a financial job search
when you can see the whole
system is just crashing?
"How do you call up a guy
and say, ""Hey, you know,"
"you have any idea
who's hiring today?"""
"You sound like an
idiot, so its..."
"Yeah, thats going
nowhere, I mean, its..."
"GILBERT: With his
situation growing worse,"
Bills sister-in-law
suggested that he get help
from positive psychology
coach Senia Maymin.
So what Ill give you
over the course of our
coaching are tools.
"So literally, hammer,
screwdriver..."
I will give you tools
to start some goals.
GILBERT: Senia received
a masters degree from
Martin Seligmans program
at the University
of Pennsylvania.
Shes trying to help Bill put his
unemployment in perspective.
Because the problem is obvious.
The guy doesnt have a job
and he wants to figure
out what he's doing.
"But that... okay,
he knows that."
He's known that for
a couple of months.
"How can we, rather than
say, ""Thats the problem,"""
how can we move around it
in a way that actually
feels fulfilling
at each step of the way?
And one of the mind exercises
between this week and next
"is whats called the ""three
good things"" exercise."
"So what it is,
is every evening"
"you write down, ""Today
this happened."""
"So, for example, ""Matty
was in a great mood"
"the whole time we
were at the park."""
And then below it you write the
three reasons why they happened.
"So, why was Matty in a
good mood at the park?"
"""I played with him""
or ""I engaged him."""
The reason the why is important
"is when we look at your
whole week of ""whys,"""
were going to start
to see patterns.
"OCONNOR: I feel like were
making baby steps right now,"
which is probably the
right thing to do.
Come up with three good
things that happened today
or identifying strengths.
Its your mommy.
"STEPHANIE: Hey,
Matty, how are you?"
"STEPHANIE: At first it
seemed like it moved him
in the right direction,"
and I was happy about that.
And he saw that he
got more gratification
"out of the things he did do
right, which is things like,"
"""Well, I got Matty
on the subway today"""
"or ""Oh, today when
Matty took a nap,"
"""I had time to
work on my resume,"
"""I did this or I did that"
"or ""I made a bunch of
phone calls to people."""
I think thats the best way for
him to think about things.
"Because if he dwelled
on the negative,"
I think it would just
be a downward spiral.
"GILBERT: At Senias suggestion,
Bill takes an online survey"
to help him identify
his strengths.
"BILL: ""Please be
honest and accurate."
"""We cannot rank
your strengths"
"until you answer
all 240 questions."""
"Wow, all right."
"""I find the world a very
interesting place."""
Sure.
"""Every day I look
forward to the opportunity"
"to learn and grow."""
(Matty fussing)
"""I have never steered a friend
wrong by giving bad advice."""
Theres a lot of
negatives in that.
"""I must stand up
for what I believe,"
"even if there are
negative results."""
"""I work at my very best
when I am a group member."""
"""Everyone's rights are
equally important to me."""
"""I am the most
important person in
someone else's life."""
"What's up, buddy?"
GILBERT: This survey
has been taken
"by hundreds of thousands
of people online,"
and its a cornerstone of many
positive psychology programs.
But it doesnt seem
to be helping Bill.
"OCONNOR: Yeah, its hard to
apply that all the time"
to come up with tasks that
are gonna take advantage
of your strengths.
"If your strength
is, you know, humor,"
"which showed up as
one of my strengths,"
Im not going to... I dont know.
What am I going to do?
"Just go out there and, you
know, stand on a corner"
and tell jokes or something
until people laugh?
"I mean, its like...
yeah, I dont know."
Okay. Your industrys broken.
What are you going to do?
You know your skills
which you know.
"You know how to do sales, you
know how to do high yield,"
"you know derivatives, you know
a lot of different things."
So you have your skills.
"And then you have
your strengths,"
which are a little
broader than skills.
So I am pulling out your VIA
signature strengths survey.
"So, if we look at this,"
"and youre looking at these
cards spread in front of you,"
"which one really
jumps out at you as,"
"""Yes, this is
definitely me""?"
I... I don't know.
"Ranking them is tough, um..."
PETERSON: Positive psychology
techniques and strategies
are particularly helpful
for people in difficult
circumstances.
"I have friends who have
lost jobs, and they say,"
"""What does positive
psychology tell me to do?"""
"And I go, ""Well, this positive
psychologist is telling you"
"""to apply for new jobs
and go to the interview"
"""and be cheerful
and be engaging."
"Be the sort of person they
want to have around."""
"OCONNOR: Hi, Justin,
my names Bill OConnor."
I wanted to get a
little information
on a posting I saw you guys had
for a UAE investment analyst.
"GILBERT: Bill may not
be sure about the value
of positive psychology,"
but he never stopped
looking for work.
Investment analyst.
"GILBERT: After
months of searching,"
he finally found
another job in finance.
But his success didnt
change his views
about positive psychology.
OCONNOR: Positive
psychology doesnt answer
the hard questions.
"You know, when we
look at, ""Where are
we going to live?""--"
that's not an
emotional decision.
That's a rational decision
based on a number of variables.
I guess it felt like I was
fishing a lot of times.
"GILBERT: Nevertheless,
Stephanie noticed"
some real changes
in her husband.
STEPHANIE: He does have a
tendency to be skeptical
about things that don't feel as
hard or quantitative or proven.
"I think its really easy to
say, ""Oh, its jotting down"
"""three things that
you did well today"
"or three things that were
good about today is minor."""
But I think it had
a really big impact.
Giggle.
"OCONNOR: My wife and my son
are everything to me, right?"
My family is the most
important thing in my life.
"It was in the beginning,"
"it was through this process,
it is going forward,"
"so if anything through the
process, you know, you..."
thats my real strength
and thats what Ive...
I've drawn upon.
Do you mind if I
do some unpacking
while you play with him?
"No, no problem."
"Hi, buddy! Whats up?"
GILBERT: The idea of focusing on
strengths instead of weaknesses
"is interesting,
but does it work?"
The jury is still out.
Even the founder of
positive psychology worries
that the enthusiasm has
gotten ahead of the evidence.
I think the press
and the publicity
that positive psychology has had
has greatly outstripped
the science.
And I think one of the...
"when I think about clinical
psychology 50 years ago,"
I think it got a great...
it was overpromised both by its
practitioners and by the press.
"So for me, if I had my
druthers, it would be"
"to build the science, build
the science, build the science"
and then kind of leak
out the findings.
Positive psychology has some
very promising new ideas.
"But for now, its
probably fair to say"
that they need more testing.
"Of course, some
scientists think that
the most promising ideas"
aren't new at all.
One of the best-studied
techniques
for improving well-being
"was developed not in a
clinic or a laboratory,"
"but on a mountaintop
2,500 years ago."
RICHARD DAVIDSON: Meditation
changes our relationship
to our thoughts and emotions.
There's nothing
magical about it.
It's not mysterious.
It can be addressed with the
known mechanisms of science.
GILBERT: Psychologist Richard
Davidson has been studying
"the benefits of
meditation since 1992,"
when the Dalai Lama
invited him to India
to measure the brain
activity of Buddhist monks.
DAVIDSON: He had heard about
me through mutual friends
and knew that I was
"a respectable, rigorous
neuroscientist"
"who had interests
in meditation,"
and he was interested in
promoting scientific research
on meditation.
And we thought that this would
be an amazing opportunity.
We can bring portable
equipment with us
and schlep it up the mountain
and see if we can
collect some data.
So we had quite a journey.
"We brought about 5,000
pounds of equipment with us."
We looked like this crazy
traveling rock band
"with, you know,
these enormous cases."
"GILBERT: Unfortunately,
once Davidson was ready
to collect the data,"
the monks had a change of heart.
DAVIDSON: They said
that theyd be happy
"to teach us everything they
know about meditation,"
but they didnt really
want to do the tests.
GILBERT: But the Dalai Lama
himself wanted to continue
fostering the dialogue between
Buddhism and Western science.
"DALAI LAMA: This
kind of dialogue,"
very helpful to
expand human knowledge
about these not yet explore.
"And still vast subject,"
our knowledge very limited.
"So, particularly
about inner world,"
"inner science, inner space."
"GILBERT: In 2000, the Dalai
Lama began sending monks"
"to Davidsons laboratory at
the University of Wisconsin,"
where they participated
in a series of
neuropsychological studies.
The results surprised
Davidson himself.
DAVIDSON: I thought about
meditation as relaxation.
"In fact, what we
see in the brain"
of an advanced
meditation practitioner
when he or she is meditating
"is heightened activation,
not relaxation."
GILBERT: Davidsons
studies of Buddhist monks
and other experienced meditators
"suggested that while they
may appear to be resting,"
their minds are actually
intensely focused.
"And, as they meditate
more and more,"
their brains begin to change.
When Davidson compared
scans of the monks
"to scans of people
whod never meditated,"
he found that the monks showed
considerably more activity
"in the left prefrontal cortex,"
a part of the brain that
registers positive emotions.
DAVIDSON: There are certain
circuits in the brain
that are more sensitive to the
processing of negative emotions
and other circuits that are more
sensitive to the processing
of positive emotions.
"And more than any other
organ in our body,"
the brain is built to change
in response to experience.
Its a learning machine.
The scientific evidence suggests
that we can actually
train our mind
and shape its
circuitry in our brain
in very specific ways to promote
increased levels of well-being.
"DALAI LAMA: I think
scientific findings
also very, very useful,"
very convincing.
It can be useful
for medical science.
And also can be useful for
bringing new generation
"more healthier mind,
more compassionate mind."
(bell chimes)
"MICHAEL BAIME: Just
give yourself a chance to
settle into your seat,"
"to settle into your body, and
to settle into this moment."
GOSSETT: The toxic effects
of the chemotherapy
keep all of the
cancer levels low.
"So when I stop the chemo,"
whats to stop it from
just flourishing again
and from just devouring me?
Its really important that I
put myself in a state of mind
that I can stay calm
and cope with it.
BAIME: Allow the focus on
the breath to expand so...
GILBERT: Michele Gossett
has begun studying
"""Mindfulness Meditation."""
She attends a weekly class at
the University of Pennsylvania
and does daily exercises at
home in the hope of reducing
her fear and anxiety.
"GOSSETT: Im doing a 40-minute
meditation every day,"
"and its extremely difficult,"
because our thoughts
distract us.
And it takes a
lot of discipline.
BAIME: And the only security
that we can ever have
is comfort with and
confidence in our ability
to manage uncertainty.
DAVIDSON: I think most
people would agree
that physical exercise
is good for your health.
And the same with
mental exercise.
If we took the
training of our mind
"as seriously as we take
physical exercise,"
we can actually train our brain
to transform our happiness.
GOSSETT: I dont
dwell on the sadness.
I have a lot less anxiety now
since Ive been meditating.
And I have to say that
my anxiety has decreased
by at least 75%.
I find that I'm
really not anxious.
I'm very calm about it.
I do get sad.
But I don't dwell
on the sadness.
I used to think that
things would make me happy
"or money, success, prestige,
position, would make me happy."
And Im realizing now
that that's not the fact.
I think you cant really
put a price on happiness
or put a label on happiness.
Happiness comes from within
and happiness comes from
experiences that we have
with people that we love.
The secret to happiness is
that there is no
secret to happiness--
"that its a choice that
you make minute by minute,"
second by second.
And you have to be willing to
take the sour with the sweet.
"Is happiness an experience,
you know, that comes and goes?"
Or is it a state
that you can live in
for long periods of time?
I don't... I dont know.
Im just happy I have
my wife and my children
and my many dogs and
birds and cats and...
maybe if we could lose
a couple of those dogs.
I think the secret to
happiness is being busy.
"The secret to happiness is,"
you dont have time
to think: Am I happy?
Human companionship
is the greatest joy.
"If I look at the times in my
life where Im most happy,"
where Im enjoying
myself the most
is when Im with my
friends or my family
"and Im doing something
adventurous,"
something kind of mildly
dangerous and laughing a lot.
"GILBERT: So, is there
a secret to happiness?"
"Well, yes, but it isn't
very much of a secret."
Scientific research suggests
that a lot of things matter--
"money, health, work-- but
that one thing matters a lot,"
and that thing is
social relationships.
Were one of the most social
animals on our planet.
"We need each other for
just about everything,"
so it isnt very surprising
that natures designed us
to experience happiness when
we're connected to others.
"Family, friends, lovers--"
those are the social connections
that matter the most.
"When theyre
strong, were happy."
"When theyre lost,
were devastated."
WOMAN: How are you?
"STUDENT: Im good, how are you?"
Hello...
"GILBERT: Renee and Bryan Cloyd
live in Blacksburg, Virginia."
Theyre doing today what they
do several times each year--
driving a group of college
students over a hundred miles
to rural Appalachia
to help repair homes
in this impoverished community.
You want to go head up this way?
GILBERT: The Cloyds are
volunteering their time
to help other people...
"No, dont touch it
until you get one."
"There you go, you just
snap the line, ladies."
GILBERT: But theyre also
hoping to help themselves.
RENEE CLOYD: Someone said
theres been a shooting
at Virginia Tech.
"I didn't think about it,"
and then something just hit.
(siren wailing)
"I turned on the
radio, just listening,"
"trying to find some news,"
and I heard that 22 had
been shot and killed
at Virginia Tech.
"I remember screaming,"
and I called my mom cause
I knew she had a computer.
"And I said, ""Could you please
check on the computer?"""
"GILBERT: On April 16, 2007,
their daughter, Austin,"
"a freshman at Virginia
Tech, was killed
in a shooting rampage"
that left 33 people dead.
BRYAN CLOYD: We were
trying to call Austin.
Every other parent
and every other friend
was trying to call
those students.
And I heard from one of the
emergency response workers
the most difficult thing
for them was to hear
the cell phones going off
and being unable to answer.
"But just hearing all
those cell phones going
off, over and over."
That's what that day was like.
It was a day of horror
and hopelessness.
Sometimes its really
comforting to be in here.
"I mean, this is a picture
of she and her friend."
Had fun at football games.
"BRYAN: You know, the initial
emotion when we lost Austin"
was just like the life
had been sucked out of us.
"And, um..."
not only...
we had no sense of direction...
no sense of how we would
ever get past that moment.
"GILBERT: The Cloyds kept asking
themselves, ""What next?"""
"But try as they might, they
just couldn't find an answer."
BRYAN: Life can end
"so quickly that everything one
does, everything one plans for,"
"dreams of, can be
gone in an instant."
"So, what's life about?"
"RENEE: I thought, ""Okay,
we gotta let people
know who Austin is."
"""Shes not just a dead person,"
"she was a vital person who
was making an impact."""
"GILBERT: As a high
school student,"
Austin did volunteer
work in Appalachia.
Her parents hoped that
by devoting themselves
"to her cause,"
theyd connect with the people
whod connected
with their daughter
and move their
own lives forward.
BRYAN: Most of the people
that we meet out here
"that we work with on their
homes, they all have a story."
"And the story almost
always involves tragedy,"
something thats happened
to their family.
RENEE: Thank you very much for
letting us visit with you.
WOMAN: Thank you for doing it.
BRYAN: And it causes me
to know everyone has pain.
So it helps to put our
grief in perspective.
"RENEE: Austins
favorite quote was,"
"""No one can do everything,"
"""but everyone
can do something, and if
everyone does something,"
"then together we can
change the world."""
"Hey, ladies, hows it going?"
BRYAN: I dont know
how long it takes
for people to reflect
upon memories of children
that theyve lost and feel
mostly happy about that memory
instead of mostly sad.
"For me now, it's still mostly
sad, and maybe a little happy."
"Okay, why dont yall help him"
so he doesnt cut
his fingers off.
Stress safety to this man.
RENEE: A lot of people
in this world just dont
have the confidence
of being loved.
And I personally
feel like I have that
to be able to give to others.
"So, coming on trips like this"
"and getting to know
these students,"
"I cant do it for
Austin anymore,"
"but if I can just give
it to one more person,"
then maybe they can give
it to someone else...
"um, because I don't have
her to give it to anymore."
"Youre right, Jared."
"Yeah, okay."
GILBERT: Can we really
transmit happiness to others?
"If we do something to make
another person happy,"
do they then do the same
thing for somebody else?
"In fact, new evidence suggests
that happiness may be"
"as contagious as
the common cold,"
that it can be passed
along from person to person
and that it can travel farther
and faster than anyone imagined.
"This is Framingham,
Massachusetts."
"In 1948, medical researchers
began tracking the residents"
of this town trying to
learn about the behaviors
that cause heart disease.
Their work continues today.
"Known as the
Framingham Heart Study,"
its one of the
worlds most extensive
"epidemiological studies,"
containing six
decades worth of data
"on the health of more
than 15,000 people."
And hidden in this
mountain of data
is a deep and powerful secret
about the nature
of human happiness.
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS:
Your happiness depends
upon whole large clusters of
people you dont even know
and who you have
no way of knowing.
GILBERT: Nicholas Christakis is
a physician and a sociologist.
He became interested
in the Framingham study
"not because he was
interested in heart disease,"
but because he was interested
in social connections.
CHRISTAKIS: These individuals
had had their social network
ties repeatedly assessed
over this 32-year period
"and, as it turns out,
had had various aspects"
of their emotional
lives assessed as well.
So what we could tell is
we could tell who these
people were connected to
every four years
or so for 30 years
"and we could
tell, for example,"
whether they were happy
or depressed or lonely
"and, in some cases, anxious,
repeatedly across time."
"GILBERT: Using the
Framingham data,"
Christakis and his
colleagues mapped out a web
"of more than
50,000 connections"
"between friends,
family and co-workers"
who participated in the study.
Then they began to calculate
how changes in the happiness
of any single person affected
the happiness of others
in this vast web
of relationships.
The results were astounding.
"CHRISTAKIS: What we
found is that if your
friend becomes happy,"
it increases the probability
that you will become happy
by about 15%.
And if your friends
friend becomes happy--
"someone you dont
even know, perhaps--"
it increases the probability
that youll become
happy by about 10%.
"Its only when we get to
four degrees of separation,"
only when were speaking
"of your friends
friends friends friend,"
that that persons emotional
state is no longer associated
with your emotional state.
"GILBERT: Everyone
knows that people can
make each other happy,"
"but before this study,
no one had any idea"
just how powerful
this effect could be.
Christakiss work shows
that happiness spreads
through social
networks like a virus;
"that happiness is, in a very
real sense, contagious."
Theres no doubt about
it: were all connected.
And those connections
exert a powerful influence
on our happiness.
Sometimes they can
even save our lives.
"MICHAEL MADDAUS: I
lived here about 40 years
ago, when I was a kid."
"Just walking in the door of my
house was so, so unpleasant."
"GILBERT: Michael Maddaus was
born in Minneapolis, Minnesota,"
and the troubled relationships
of his childhood
left an indelible mark.
MADDAUS: I was an only child.
I grew up with my mother
and my grandmother.
My mother worked two jobs
as a waitress to support us
because my grandmother was home
all the time taking care of me.
The lid came off
that predictable
situation by two events:
"my grandmother died,
which left us in a void,"
and then my stepfather came in.
And that's when the
alcoholism reared its head.
My mother would be in bed.
My stepfather would be up in a
chair with cocktail in hand.
"My mother would be bedridden
for maybe up to a month,"
and she would even call
for me in a drunken tone
"to bring her a drink, or
food, or something like that."
"I was, of course,
bitter and angry"
about what was now going on.
"In essence Id lost my mother,
the mother that I had known,"
to this alcoholic life.
And thats when I
began to really start
living more on the streets...
"and started to get into trouble
with my friends, my new family."
"And the trouble started
simply with shoplifting,"
"escalated to
burglaries, car thefts,"
so that we were pretty
much running around
doing what we wanted.
Right over here was my friends
house and he used to deal LSD
right out of the back
of the house there.
A good source for all
of us at the time.
"I and my friends, wed just
do everything in our power"
to find ways to alter our mood.
"We... you know, drinking,
drugs, LSD, speed, you name it."
It was pretty much anything
we could get our hands on.
Right up here on
the left is a house
that we were all holed up in
and we were busted up there
by a very spectacular
bunch of police outside.
"And they had us right over
here, in front of this house,"
"all of us pinned down,
handcuffed on the ground."
I was arrested 24 times total.
"The vast majority of
that was for car theft,"
occasional break-ins
"and other sorts of
misdemeanors, drunken behavior,"
disorderly stuff and the like.
But I remember every
time going down
to the juvenile detention center
with its drab green cement walls
and just a profound
sense of depression
that would occur within me
and just the hopelessness.
And to this day I can remember
"the deep, gut-wrenching
depression"
that would come
over me in a wave.
"You know, I don't know
what the future holds."
I had a meeting with
my parole officer
after Id been arrested one
more time subsequently.
"And I was sitting in the car,
outside the high school,"
"and he told me, ""You're done."
"One more arrest and
you're going to be
tried as an adult."""
I had at least the
insight to know
"that if I stayed in
this environment,"
I was gonna get
in trouble again.
"GILBERT: Although many
of his friends would
soon be in prison,"
"fate had something different
in mind for Maddaus,"
whose life was changed forever
by a single social connection.
I got a job at a very
high-end furniture store
that sold very expensive
modern furniture.
Its an environment that
allowed me to learn a lot
"about the other side of life,"
"where there was money, culture,
art, wine and the like,"
and this was something I
had not experienced before.
So it allowed me to become
aware of this as a possibility.
But the real transition for me
in terms of helping to guide me
came through a fluke
interaction that I had
in delivering
furniture to a surgeon.
"It was a very big
job that we had,"
and I ended up going
out there multiple times
to install custom-made
furniture.
And so I got to know him.
"For whatever reason,
he saw something in me"
and he decided to take
me under his wing.
"STACY ROBACK: My first
impressions of Mike, when
he first came in the door,"
there was a spark there that
was blatantly obvious to me.
And his persistence in
pursuing our relationship
was conspicuous and
it was infectious.
I wrote a letter to the
dean of the medical school.
"I mean, it makes
no sense. Right."
I wouldnt do it today.
MADDAUS: I would go out
to his house on Saturdays
and just hang out with him.
And he might take
a nap on the couch
while I would sit there and
watch football or something.
But when it came time for
me to ask him questions
"and get some guidance,
he always gave
me the right advice."
"He said, ""I had
a difficult time"
"""even getting a
high school diploma,"
"""and I havent been to
college, and I cant read,"
"and I can't add a column
of numbers together."""
"And my response to that was,
""Well, just... just do it."""
"MADDAUS: He saw worth in me,
and it could be developed."
And that was what
decided my fate.
Im a full professor
of thoracic surgery
in the department of surgery at
the University of Minnesota.
And I landed upon surgery
when I got onto the rotation
as a medical student.
"All of a sudden, here we are in
a high-adrenaline environment,"
"risky activity,
life and death--"
all the things that were
certainly embedded in me
and my past and how I grew up.
I fit in just perfectly.
ANN MASTEN: The story of Mikes
life illustrates beautifully
what happens in childhood
and going down a dark
road doesn't doom you.
That you can turn
your life around
and you can construct a new life
with the help of other people.
GILBERT: Psychologist Ann Masten
studies how children
respond to adversity.
She became interested in Maddaus
because of the way he used
his adult relationships to
overcome a troubled youth.
He encountered people who
began to care about him.
He connected with mentors
who opened doors for him
and coached him.
"Yeah, we probably
should check..."
"GILBERT: For almost 30
years, Masten has been
working on a study"
"that tracks over 200 people,"
"many of whom,
like Maddaus, grew up in
difficult circumstances."
"MASTEN: We recruited
them when they were
eight to 12 years old,"
"and then we followed them
up after about seven years,"
ten years and then 20 years.
We wanted to study
what was happening
both when things were going well
and when things were
not going so well.
And we learned a lot
about the nature of stress
that kids encounter
and also about all the
kinds of protective factors
that seem to make a difference
in children's lives.
GILBERT: Mastens
findings tell us
that the key to overcoming
childhood adversity
lies in developing
strong relationships
"with competent and
caring individuals,"
regardless of how or
when we meet them.
"MASTEN: When you're young,
they're parenting-type figures."
"When youre older,"
"they can be mentors,
friends, romantic partners."
Any concerns or issues?
You got any pains?
"MASTEN: In Mikes case,"
"these kind of people
came into his life late,"
when he was at the
doorstep of adulthood.
"And he was optimistic, even
though he probably didnt have"
too many reasons
to be optimistic.
"And I think people around
him responded to that,"
to his motivation and interest
in going in a new direction.
And I think what
you see in his life
is a kind of positive snowball.
"MADDAUS: When I reflect back
about, how did this happen?"
How did I manage to make a
success out of this mess?
I go back to the... the
observation of others
and using those as
significant opportunities
for personal development.
(piano melody playing)
"Without a doubt,"
one of the most important
things that bring me happiness
"is being engaged in my family,
in taking care of them,"
"in fostering my
childrens development,"
in being a good
husband to my wife.
"These are sometimes trite
comments that people make,"
"you know, being
a good husband,"
"being a father and
all that stuff,"
but I actually mean it and its
something I came to learn.
It wasn't something
that was just immediate.
"For me, happiness
means being engaged"
in things that
involve other people
and being committed to something
that is about other people.
GILBERT: Social connections are
clearly the key to happiness.
"That's a cause for
celebration, but it's
also a cause for worry,"
"because as people age,"
"their social networks
get smaller and smaller,"
"which suggests that
the older we get,"
the unhappier we should become.
"And yet, surprising
new evidence reveals"
its usually the
other way around.
"As we get older, were
increasingly clear"
"about what our strengths are,
what our weaknesses are."
Were increasingly clear
about who cares about us
"and who doesn't,"
and so we're able to
mold our worlds better.
"GILBERT: Over the last
two decades, psychologist
Laura Carstensen"
has been monitoring
hundreds of individuals
to see how their emotional
lives change as they age.
CARSTENSEN: We recruited
"a group of participants who
were initially aged 18 to 94,"
and we asked them to carry an
electronic pager with them.
"Each time they were paged,
we asked them to tell us"
the extent to which
they were feeling
each of 19 different emotions.
And we had them give
us this information
35 times during a week.
GILBERT: Carstensens findings
tell us that people become
"increasingly positive
as they grow older,"
as long as they arent suffering
from physical pain or
debilitating illness.
CARSTENSEN: It was
pretty dramatic.
"Essentially, what we
found is that 70-year-olds"
were experiencing
fewer negative emotions
than 40-year-olds;
40-year-olds were experiencing
fewer negative emotions
than 20-year-olds.
"GILBERT: In
later studies, Carstensen
identified several causes"
for this remarkable shift.
CARSTENSEN: Humans know
that they're mortal.
We know that we have only
a certain amount of time
"on this planet,"
and this changes
peoples motivation
and changes their
emotional experience.
"As we age, it appears
that people are better"
"at experiencing the moment,"
enjoying what theyre doing at
a particular point in time.
"In some sense, it's the
silver lining of getting old"
that we don't have to
prepare for the future.
We don't have the
burden of the future.
GILBERT: The major
consequence of this change?
Older people tend to alter
their social behavior.
CARSTENSEN: When
motivation shifts
"so youre focusing on what
matters most in life,"
for most people they start to
focus on their relationships
and their closest relationships.
You value your friendships.
"You value your
children, your family."
GILBERT: Betty Schneider
is 87 years old.
Shes one of hundreds of elderly
people who have participated
in Carstensens studies.
"SCHNEIDER: As
Ive become older,"
it seems that I really
appreciate my life even more.
"When I was younger, I didn't
even think about old age."
But it turned out
to be wonderful.
GILBERT: Betty is a widow.
"Her husband, Jack, succumbed
to a stroke six years ago."
"But like many people
in her situation,"
she doesnt dwell on the loss.
"In fact, her daily life
is remarkably busy."
"She takes classes, spends
time with her grandchildren"
and has a full social schedule.
SCHNEIDER: I miss Jack.
We did so many things together.
We were married for 61 years.
"And after Jack passed on,
it was... pretty glum,"
and gradually it's
become better again.
"Theres lots going on,"
"and he would enjoy a lot of the
things that Im doing, um..."
"but Im sorry hes not here,"
but Im just so glad we
had all those years.
CARSTENSEN: In some
ways it challenges
"our most fundamental
assumptions about happiness,"
because we think that happiness
is derived from youth
"and power and
attractiveness, health,"
"all of these things
that decline with age,"
but yet were finding
that among older people
"who are clearly suffering
these kinds of losses,"
are also somehow experiencing
life emotionally
better than ever.
SCHNEIDER: I feel
very fortunate.
I often go through all the good
things that have happened--
what's been good today.
Its interesting younger
people dont really believe
that you can be optimistic
and feel positive
"about things that are
happening when youre old,"
"but believe me, you do."
"And I know I dont have
a long time to live,"
"but its... its turned out to be
a very, very rewarding time."
"GILBERT: We start
out in high chairs,"
"we end up in wheelchairs,"
"and somewhere between the two,
we all have to figure out"
where our happiness lies
and then start marching
in that direction.
So who brought the map?
"Well, everyone did."
"Grandmothers and
uncles, priests and
rabbis, taxi drivers,"
"bartenders,
motivational speakers--"
"they all have something
to say about happiness,"
but they don't all
say the same thing.
And that's where
science comes in.
By using scientific methods
"to identify the causes
of human happiness,"
were learning that the
secret of happiness
was never very secret.
"Were connected to each other,
we belong to each other,"
were made for each other.
"Life is a journey through time,
and happiness is what happens"
when we make that
journey together.